Factsheet
Organic Crop Rotation


Why do I need a crop rotation?

A balanced rotation is the cornerstone of an organic system. It;
• Varies the demands on the soil
• Provides the nutritional requirements of each crop
• Limits the spread of diseases
• Controls weeds
• Breaks pest lifecycles
• Reduces nutrient loss, and
• Helps to build up soil fertility
Rotations should be designed to suit individual farm conditions and marketing
strategy, as well as taking into account the following basic principles:
• Shallow rooting crops following deep rooted crops
• High root mass crops following low root mass crops
• Weed susceptible crops following weed suppressing crops
• Nitrogen fixing crops following nitrogen demanding crops
The organic standards
Organic Standards require that certain principles are observed when designing and
implementing a crop rotation:
• A balance must be achieved between fertility- A balance must be achieved between fertility-building and exploitative building and exploitative
cropping cropping
Harvesting the saleable portion of cash crops inevitably results in the removal
of nutrients from the soil. These must be replaced, which can be achieved by
the inclusion of fertility-building crops in the rotation. In addition, composted
farmyard manure and some permitted organic fertilisers may be applied.
• Rotations must include a leguminous crop to provide Rotations must include a leguminous crop to provide nitrogen for nitrogen for
subsequent crops subsequent crops
The roots of legumes are colonised by bacteria that take nitrogen from the air
and convert it into a form that can be used by plants.
• Crops with differing root systems must be included within a rotation within a rotation
Using crops with different root systems in a rotation helps to utilise nutrients at
different depths in the soil, as well as maintain a good soil structure, manage
weeds and stimulate soil organisms.

• Plants with similar pest and disease susceptibilities must be separated by an es must be separated by an
appropriate time interval appropriate time interval
The build up of soil-borne diseases such as potato cyst nematodes, onion white
rot or club root in brassicas can be prevented by growing non-susceptible crops
for three or four years after a susceptible crop has been grown. Many soil-borne
nematodes and pests which inhabit the soil at some stage in their life cycle can
also be avoided or controlled in this way. As a result, the SA organic standards
require a minimum of three seasons before potatoes, alliums and brassicas can
return to the same area of land.
The exception to this is indoor greenhouse production, where due to the limited
range of crops grown a crop rotation is recommended, but not required.
Recommendations
The organic standards also highlight the following good practices to consider
when designing a rotation, though they are not a requirement:
• Minimise the time that the soil is left uncovered Minimise the time that the soil is left uncovered
More nutrients are leached from uncovered soil than from soil with a cover
crop. Therefore nutrients can be conserved in the system by planting a green
manure when the ground would otherwise be bare. This can be incorporated
back into the soil at the appropriate time, making the nutrients available for the
next cash crop.
• Maintain or increase the organic matter levels in t Maintain or increase the organic matter levels in the soil n the soil he soil
Fertility-building crops and other materials such as composted farmyard
manure help to gradually increase levels of organic matter in the soil. This is
vital for improving soil structure and also provides a reservoir of nutrients that
gradually become available to the crops.
• Vary weed susceptible crops with weed suppressing crops
Certain crops are more susceptible to weed infestations than others. Weed
problems can be reduced if weed-susceptible crops, such as carrots or parsnips,
are grown after crops that have the capacity to suppress weeds, such as
potatoes.
Designing a rotation

1.Collect information about the site Collect information about the site Collect information about the site
To help design a rotation it is useful to have as much information as possible about
the site; what was grown there before? How intensive was it? What thrived and
what didn’t? Have there been any pest and disease problems?
The certifying body will also usually suggest that a soil analysis is taken and
submitted to them before organic conversion begins. It is a worthwhile exercise to
take a full soil analysis that covers the soil composition (e.g. proportions of sand,
clay, silt, peat and loam); the organic matter content; the pH; and the soil’s nutrient

status (available and unavailable nitrogen, potassium, phosphorus, calcium,
magnesium and trace elements).
Annual soil analyses carried out at the same time each year can then monitor
changes throughout the rotation, and practices can be amended accordingly.

2.Consider market outlets Consider market outlets Consider market outlets
Typical outlets for organic produce are wholesale and marketing co-operatives,
supermarkets or a direct marketing system. Often a co-operative will need to know
the acreage of each crop a grower intends to supply each year, and cropping plans
may need to be adjusted according to what the co-operative can market.
Supermarket buyers will also need to know the cropping plan, and continuity of
supply within a specified period or season may be important.
If it is intended to direct market a wide range of crops, different varieties and
successive sowings will need to be grown to supply the range of produce for as
long as possible over the year. This can make rotation planning complicated, but
the wide range of crops grown can also ensure that a more robust rotation for pest
and disease management can be used.

3.Consider potential crops Consider potential crops Consider potential crops
Plants from the same family tend to be prone to the same pests and diseases so it is
essential that crops from the same family are not grown on the same site in
successive years.

Other factors to consider include the crops’ nutrient demands and rooting depth.
High nutrient-demanding crops should follow the fertility-building phase so that
the best use is made of the first flush of available nutrients. Where possible,
alternate deep rooting crops with shallow ones to use nutrients at different depths.
Harvesting time also influences the order of crops in a rotation. For example
autumn-sown crops need a clear site in the summer and/or autumn to allow the
necessary cultivations, and so are restricted to following crops that are out by the
summer. Conversely summer-sown crops such as winter brassicas normally follow
overwintered vegetables or green manures, which leave the land free earlier than
any spring-sown crop.
The harvesting procedure is a factor in addition to the harvesting time. For
example harvesting field scale carrots in a wet autumn can churn the land up and
damage soil structure, meaning that a structure-building ley has to follow.

4.Think about green manures and building fertility Think about green manures and building fertility Think about green manures and building fertility
Fertility-building green manures are divided into the following categories;
legumes, non-legumes, one growing season, two or more growing seasons.
Legumes: Legumes that can be used as a green manure Legumes: include clover,
vetch, trefoil, beans, peas and Lucerne. These crops have an association with
nitrogen-fixing bacteria which take nitrogen from the air so that it becomes
available to the crop and eventually to other crops via the soil. In addition
some deep-rooted legumes are able to extract nutrients from deep soil and
improve drainage.
Non-legumes: legumes: legumes: Non-legumes that may be used as green manures include
grazing rye, phacelia, mustard, chicory and grass. These crops do not
increase the nitrogen content of the soil, however they keep the ground
covered and take up nutrients that would otherwise be leached. Grazing rye,
which is especially good at doing this, grows relatively quickly in the
autumn, making it a good overwintering cover crop. Incorporating these
green manures back into the soil releases nitrogen that can be used by
following crops.

5.Look at example rotations Look at example rotations Look at example rotations
A typical rotation might start with a 2 year fertility-building ley, followed by a 3
year cash cropping phase. The cash crops could be potatoes or a brassica, onions or
leeks and finally a deep-rooted crop such as carrots or parsnips.
Fertility- Fertility-building phase: building phase: building phase:
Whilst under organic conversion a two-year fertility building phase is
common. Often a grass/clover ley on a stocked system will be grazed. If the
holding has no stock the ley should be mown every three to four weeks
during the growing season, at a cutting height of 12-15cm, and the mowings

left to rot down. Regular mowing or grazing is essential to stop weeds
setting seed and to maximise the general productivity of the sward.
Where land is already organic and under arable/horticultural production a
one year fertility-building period for every three years of cash cropping may
suffice. However, this system is only suited to well structured soils, and
green manures need to be fitted in between cash crops wherever possible
e.g. over the winter. This type of rotation is also likely to require
supplementation with composted manures.
A rotation that relies solely on fertility-building crops for nitrogen supply
will probably need a longer fertility-building phase, for example two years of
grass/clover ley followed by two or three years of cash cropping (and short
term green manures wherever possible), then returning to two years
grass/clover ley.
Cash cropping phase: Cash cropping phase:
After the fertility-building phase cash cropping can begin. Normally a high
nutrient-demanding crop, such as potatoes or a brassica, is grown first.
These crops will make the best use of the large amounts of nutrients that
become available when the ley or green manure is first turned in. Due to
their growth habit and the cultivations they require, potatoes are also good
at keeping the land free of weeds.
The second crop will usually be a vegetable that can make use of some
residual fertility and can benefit from the weed clearing abilities of the
previous crop e.g. onions and leeks.
The last crop in the rotation is usually a low nutrient demanding crop e.g.
carrots or parsnips.
When the rotation has completed one full cycle it should return to a fertilitybuilding crop.

6.Plan the rotation Plan the rotation Plan the rotation
Draw a year planner to cover a full cycle of the rotation and divide the years up into
months. Mark in when the crops are to be planted and harvested to see at a glance
if the rotation is going to be feasible. Avoid excessively long gaps between crops;
some can be filled with a green manure, but longer ones might indicate that the
rotation is too generous and needs to be altered. Remember that the rotation is not
written in stone; it will need to be continually adapted to take into account the
demands of the market, pest and disease problems or nutrient balance.
If the land is in conversion mark in the planner when the land will reach full
organic status. You can then check that crops you intend to market as organic will
be planted after that date.

7.Consider:

a) Nutrient a) Nutrient Nutrientbudgets budgets budgets
Calculating a nutrient budget can give a rough indication of whether a
rotation is balanced by estimating the overall nutrient gains and losses for
its duration. If necessary the rotation can be adjusted to make the figures
balance, or manures and allowable fertilisers can be applied to correct any
deficiencies.
b) Financial b) Financial Financialbudgets budgets budgets
A financial budget can be used to compare the financial returns from
different rotations. The simplest way to do this is to use Gross Margins
(output minus variable costs). See Organic Farm Management Handbook
(Organic Research Centre) for more details.
As important as the financial budget is, there is little point in examining the
financial implications of a rotation if it is not first balanced nutritionally.
The ideal is to maximise financial returns from the rotation at the same time
as maintaining a nutrient balance.
c) Labour c) Labourand machinery deman and machinery deman and machinery demands
Organic holdings require constant management and operations need to be
carried out in a timely fashion, so rotations must be planned to facilitate the
labour requirements. The year planner showing each year of the rotation
should help identify any labour requirement clashes.
d) Balancing d) Balancing Balancingthe range of crops the range of crops the range of crops
In practice, a rotation is easiest to plan and manage if the holding is divided
into the same number of areas as there are years in the rotation. For
example, a four-year rotation will work best if the holding is divided into
four areas, or multiples of four. This may be tricky if the holding is not
converted to organic status in one go.
In some cases parts of a holding may need to follow a different rotation in
order to balance the acreage under fertility-building crops with cash crops
in order to achieve the right balance of crops for marketing.

8.Monitor the rotation Monitor the rotation Monitor the rotation
All rotations require constant monitoring, not just for nutrient status but also for
subtle soil structure changes whether for the better or for the worse. Symptoms that
may reflect a problem include gradual changes in the land such as staying wet for
longer, more passes required to make an adequate tilth, compaction at deeper
layers, and fewer earthworms being found in the soil. Deterioration in soil
conditions means that the rotation is not sustainable and must be reassessed.
Alternatively if these aspects are improving you know you’re on the right track!
